# Grigoratouet2019_Biogeosciences_SM
code and xls file with model output


Supplementary materials (SM) for Grigoratou et al., 2019 “A trait-based modelling approach to planktonic foraminifera ecology”. Here you can find the code and an xls file with the absolute and relative biomass of planktonic foraminifera from all tested scenarios.
Code files: The “Plankton_Size_Chemostat_Grigoratou2019.py” file contains all the size-depended parameters and model equations. The “Grigoratou2019_Experiments.py” file runs the model and it also includes the plankton groups diameters, the range of the input nutrient concentration, the code for plotting the plankton biomass through time and the code for saving the data results in an excel file. Since all the parameters have been defined from the user, the model can start running with the Grigoratou2019_Experiments.py file. In the present study we tested the calcification costs and benefits of two life stages of planktonic foraminifera, at two different ecosystem structures with three different ambient water temperatures and nutrient environments. The user can make changes in the following model parameters and arrays in order to test different water temperatures, input nutrient concentrations, ecosystem structures and planktonic foraminifera calcification costs and benefits.
Water temperature:
The self.T parameter (located in the Plankton_Size_Chemostat_Grigoratou2019.py file) defines the ambient water temperature in Kelvin.
Input nutrient concentration:
The N0_range array (located in the Grigoratou2019_Experiments.py file) sets the range of the input nutrient concentration (No). In the present study the range was from 1 to 5 mmolN m-3. With the n_iter parameter (located in the Grigoratou2019_Experiments.py file) the user can choose how many different input nutrient concentration (No) would like to test within the N0_range.
Ecosystem structure: food chain or food web: There are two main differences between the food chain and food web: the background mortality and grazing kernel of zooplankton. As there is no predation on zooplankton in the food chain model, we assumed a size-dependent mortality term for zooplankton. For the food web model, we assumed a linear mortality term equal to phytoplankton as the predation on zooplankton is present. In the food chain the zooplankton is an herbivorous specialist (i.e. consume only one prey) while in the food web an omnivorous generalist (i.e. consume multi prey) predator. The model.pred_model parameter (located in the Grigoratou2019_Experiments.py file) is switching the different zooplankton mortalities and grazing kernel; from herbivorous (food chain) to omnivorous (food web). The self.sigma and self.sigma_f parameters (located in the Plankton_Size_Chemostat_Grigoratou2019.py file) are the the standard deviation (σ) of zooplankton grazing kernel and define how specialist or generalist predators the zooplankton (self.sigma) and planktonic foraminifera (self.sigma_f) can be. In the present study these parameters were both equal to 0.001 for the food chain. For the food web self.sigma equals to 0.5 and self.sigma_f varies from 0.5 (prolocular) to 1.0 (adult). For a more detailed description of zooplankton grazing kernel the reader is referred to the method section of the manuscript.
Planktonic foraminifera calcification:
We defined energy loss to be the main cost of calcification by decreasing planktonic foraminifera’s maximum growth rate. The self.qrowth_f parameter (located in the Plankton_Size_Chemostat_Grigoratou2019.py file) defines the different energy losses and its value ranges from 0 (100% energy loss) to 1 (0% energy loss). Protection from predation and pathogens (e.g viruses, bacteria, parasites) have been considered to be the main benefit of calcification. The self.gf array (located in the Plankton_Size_Chemostat_Grigoratou2019.py file) is used for testing different predation pressures on prey groups and its value can vary among different prey types (phytoplankton, zooplankton, planktonic foraminifera). The user should make sure that the values she/he wants to test have been set for the right plankton function types. In the present study we defined the self.gf for phytoplankton and zooplankton to be equals to 1 (100% predation) and for planktonic foraminifera to range from 0 (no predation) to 1 (100% predation). In the end, in the model, pathogens are representing via the background mortality term. To examine the benefit of shell against background mortality the user can decrease planktonic foraminifera’s background mortality with the self.mortal_f parameter (located in the Plankton_Size_Chemostat_Grigoratou2019.py file). The range value for self.mortal_f is from 0 (100% decrease of mortality) to 1 (0% decrease of mortality).

